# Performance efficiency

**Pages**: 20

---

## 13 – Select the optimal compute solution

# Best Practice 13.1 – Evaluate or estimate performance requirements

Future hardware requirements can be estimated by examining the capacity and usage
patterns of existing SAP systems. SAP provides several tools for sizing hardware for new
and existing systems. To further validate sizing estimates, proof of concept (POC)
deployments and performance testing can be used.

**Suggestion 13.1.1 – Reference SAPS performance metrics of source
hardware**

SAP benchmarks hardware using [SAP Application Performance
Standard (SAPS)](https://www.sap.com/about/benchmark/measuring.html), which is a hardware-independent unit of measurement that
describes the performance of a system configuration in the SAP environment. Consult your
existing hardware vendor and the SAP benchmark directory to obtain SAPS values for your
on-premises server hardware.

A sizing based on SAPS is appropriate for a migration that introduces minimal changes
to the underlying capacity requirements, often referred to as a lift and shift
migration.

**Suggestion 13.1.2 – Reference SAP EarlyWatch Alert reports and
monitoring tools for historical usage details**

[SAP EarlyWatch Alert](https://support.sap.com/en/offerings-programs/support-services/earlywatch-alert.html) reports provide utilization information of your SAP
application, such as peak memory and CPU usage. A holistic analysis of these reports
spanning several peak events, such as month-end closing and large batch loads, can provide
valuable insights into system usage.

In addition to EarlyWatch alert reports, infrastructure level monitoring tools can
provide more granularity and further insights.

**Suggestion 13.1.3 – Use SAP HANA sizing reports to estimate compute
requirements**

When migrating to SAP HANA, use SAP provided tools for estimating the size of the
target compute. The output generated by these tools details the hardware sizing
requirements for your SAP HANA database.

- SAP Documentation: [SAP HANA Administration Guide for HANA Platform](https://help.sap.com/viewer/6b94445c94ae495c83a19646e7c3fd56/2.0.05/en-US/bdf26308bb571014b7bcd3bcd586aecd.html)
- AWS Documentation: [SAP HANA
Sizing](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sap/latest/sap-hana/migrating-hana--.html)
- SAP Note: [1793345
– Sizing for SAP Suite on HANA](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/1793345) [Requires SAP Portal Access]
- SAP Note: [1872170
– ABAP on HANA sizing report (S/4HANA, Suite on HANA...)](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/1872170) [Requires SAP
Portal Access]
- SAP Note: [2296290
– New Sizing Report for SAP BW/4HANA](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/2296290) [Requires SAP Portal Access]
- SAP Note: [1958910
- EarlyWatch Alert For HANA Database](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/1958910) [Requires SAP Portal Access]

**Suggestion 13.1.4 – Use SAP Quick Sizer for greenfield
implementations and functional changes**

SAP Quick Sizer can be used for sizing new SAP implementations or for those undergoing
changes (for example, increased user base, new functionality or modules). The tool helps
you to translate your application’s requirements into hardware specifications. For best
results, technical and functional teams should collaborate to input values into the Quick
Sizer tool.

We recommend the use of SAP expert sizing to validate the sizing of complex
implementations.

For more information on SAP tools and services, refer to the following:

- SAP Documentation: [SAP: Sizing Benchmarks](https://www.sap.com/about/benchmark/sizing.html)

**Suggestion 13.1.5 – Use proof of concept deployments for sizing
accuracy**

You can take advantage of the flexibility of AWS services to right-size your SAP
workloads and scale as business demands change. Use proofs of concept (POCs) to test
migrations to cloud and analyze the performance requirements. This can help right-size the
workloads for both cost and performance.

*Source: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/sap-lens/best-practice-13-1.html*

---

# Best Practice 13.2 - Select EC2 instances suitable for SAP workloads

AWS works with SAP to ensure that AWS services are suitable to implement and
operate SAP software across a wide selection of instance types. Use guidance from the
relevant SAP notes and documentation to identify suitable instances. EC2 instance families
offer different ratios of CPU and memory, as well as storage and network throughput
characteristics suitable for running SAP workloads. Map your requirements to the
appropriate instance type using performance metrics, SAPS figures, and compute estimates.
Confirm availability of these instances in your selected Region and Availability
Zone.

**Suggestion 13.2.1 – Follow SAP guidance on supported databases,
operating systems, and AWS services**

AWS offers services that can be used for the deployment of SAP products. SAP Note:
[1656099 - SAP
Applications on AWS: Supported DB/OS and Amazon EC2 products](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/1656099) describes which
SAP products, database and operating system combinations and Amazon EC2 instance types are
currently supported.

You can determine the availability of individual instance types within a specific AZ
using the AWS CLI [to describe instance type offerings](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/reference/ec2/describe-instance-type-offerings.html).

- AWS Documentation: [Amazon EC2 Instance Types for SAP](https://aws.amazon.com/sap/instance-types/)
- SAP Documentation: [SAP NetWeaver benchmarks](https://www.sap.com/dmc/exp/2018-benchmark-directory/#/sd?filters=v:4a9e824336e2837bf9081e423d576dba)

**Suggestion 13.2.2 – Use hardware metrics and SAPS to guide
selection**

Each SAP supported Amazon EC2 instance family provides a specific vCPU to memory
ratio. You should evaluate each instance family based on your requirements to understand
the performance profile. The current generation of Amazon EC2 instances (based on [AWS Nitro](https://aws.amazon.com/ec2/nitro/) ) offers the best
performance and should be used if available and certified for the deployment scenario.

SAP application servers can use either the general purpose (`m*`) or memory
optimized (`r*`) instances. Where there is a requirement for a higher vCPU to
memory ratio, consider using compute optimized (`c*`) instances. For AnyDB
database servers, memory optimized (`r*`) instances are a good fit for the
required core to memory ratio, but additional analysis should be done to validate the
sizing, especially if your deployment is subject to per-CPU licensing. For SAP HANA
databases that run in memory, memory optimized (`r*`, `x*`,
`u*`) are your only options.

**Suggestion 13.2.3 – Use SAP HANA hardware directory and memory
requirement to select EC2 instances for SAP HANA**

AWS has SAP HANA certification for a subset of Amazon EC2 instances to run SAP HANA
workloads. Details of these instances, and the IaaS application types supported (OLAP, OLTP,
SAP Business One, Scale-Out) can be found in [Certified and Supported SAP HANA Hardware](https://www.sap.com/dmc/exp/2014-09-02-hana-hardware/enEN/#/solutions?filters=iaas;ve:23) and [Amazon EC2 Instance Types for SAP](https://aws.amazon.com/sap/instance-types/).

Database size and actual working memory usage will determine the memory requirement
and instance selection.

For non-production workloads, additional options exist. Refer to the blog:

- SAP on AWS Blog: [Smaller X1e instances for SAP HANA non-production workloads](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/awsforsap/smaller-x1e-instances-for-sap-hana-non-production-workloads/)

**Suggestion 13.2.4 – Be aware of EC2 instance features and throughput
characteristics**

Amazon EC2 instances have different features and throughput characteristics which
should be evaluated based on your use case, particularly for workloads with high I/O and
throughput requirements. These include enhanced networking capabilities through the [Elastic Network Adapter (ENA)](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/enhanced-networking-ena.html#ena-performance), I/O performance, Amazon EBS optimization, and
suitability for placement groups. For a full list of features, see:

- AWS Documentation: [General Purpose Instances](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/general-purpose-instances.html)
- AWS Documentation: [Memory Optimized Instances](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/memory-optimized-instances.html)
- AWS Documentation: [Compute Optimized Instances](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/compute-optimized-instances.html)

*Source: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/sap-lens/best-practice-13-2.html*

---

# Best Practice 13.3 – Select architectures which allow for independent scaling of systems or components

SAP systems and components should have the flexibility to scale without being
constrained. This might be accomplished within the allocated hardware or by using
horizontal scaling of some components. Consider which architectures allow for this scaling
and evaluate any associated trade-offs.

**Suggestion 13.3.1 – Consider cross-system or cross-component
performance impact**

Isolate individual systems or components (for example, Central Services, application
servers, and database) to avoid negative performance impact between components. Deploying
multiple smaller instance sizes can provide options for instance reuse, workload-based
scaling, and capacity on-demand. There are exceptions when trying to optimize the use of
resources for cost reasons. Refer to the cost pillar for more details.

**Suggestion 13.3.2 – Consider capacity flexibility for peak
performance**

By selecting architectures which allow for scaling of components, such as the
application servers, it will be possible to adapt your capacity to match with performance
requirements. This allows your SAP systems to scale for exceptional demand including month
end processing or seasonal peaks.

*Source: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/sap-lens/best-practice-13-3.html*

---

# Best Practice 13.4 – Choose location to minimize latency

Deploy your SAP instances in Regions and Availability Zones that minimize latency for
key business processes impacting end users, critical interfaces, and intra-system
traffic.

**Suggestion 13.4.1 – Select Region and cloud connectivity to optimize
performance**

Choose a Region based on proximity to your SAP end users and corporate data center.
Select and size any cloud connectivity options (such as Direct Connect and VPN) to accommodate
your data transfer requirements.

Use SAP performance tools to understand the breakdown of user response time (such as
network, GUI, application, and database) and evaluate the impact of any changes to the
network round trip time as a result of increased latency. We recommend you focus on high
frequency, low latency interfaces between systems in different locations.

If increased latency impacts certain end user groups, consider the use of end user
compute services and accelerators.

- AWS Documentation: [AWS
Direct Connect](https://aws.amazon.com/directconnect/)
- AWS Documentation: [What is AWS Global Accelerator? - AWS Global Accelerator](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/global-accelerator/latest/dg/what-is-global-accelerator.html)
- SAP on AWS Blog: [Deploying SAP GUI on Amazon AppStream 2.0](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/desktop-and-application-streaming/deploying-sap-gui-on-amazon-appstream-2-0/)

**Suggestion 13.4.2 – Be aware of SAP guidelines for intra-system
latency**

SAP provides guidance for acceptable network latency for two traffic patterns: between
SAP application servers and the database, and between SAP HANA database servers (primary and
secondary) for the purposes of data replication. AWS regional networks generally meet or
exceed these requirements.

**Network Latency between SAP application servers and database
(Pattern 1)**

The following SAP guidance for database to application server connectivity is based on
systems running in a single data center, which does not reﬂect the resiliency beneﬁts of a
Multi-AZ deployment. An Availability Zone is one or more discrete data centers with
redundant power, networking, and connectivity in an AWS Region separated by a meaningful
distance (at least 10km).

Resilient SAP architectures in AWS typically involve deploying infrastructure across
multiple AZs, including SAP application server and database instances.

If you have SAP transactions or batch jobs with time-critical performance requirements and
that make a signiﬁcant number of database calls, we recommend that you run these jobs on SAP
application servers located in the same AZ as the database. This can be achieved by using
SAP Logon Groups (transaction SMLG) for end users and a batch server group (transaction
SM61) for background processing jobs. This helps ensure that the latency sensitive parts of
the SAP workload run on application servers with the lowest latency to the database. Use
tools such as NIPING to measure latency.

- SAP Note: [1100926 -
FAQ: Network performance](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/1100926) [Requires SAP Portal Access]
- SAP Note: [2543171 -
Latency issue between application server and database](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/2543171) [Requires SAP Portal
Access]

**Network Latency between SAP HANA primary and secondary servers
(Pattern 2)**

The network latency between the primary and secondary instances will be a factor in the
redo log shipping wait time. For synchronous replication, SAP recommends that this wait time
should be in the low single millisecond range. This requirement can be achieved across AWS
Availability Zones. Use tools such as NIPING to measure latency.

- SAP Documentation: [SAP HANA system replication network requirements](https://www.sap.com/documents/2016/06/18079a1c-767c-0010-82c7-eda71af511fa.html)

**Suggestion 13.4.3 – Use placement groups for SAP HANA scale
out**

To meet the SAP certification for internode communication in an SAP HANA scale-out
deployment, it is necessary to use a cluster placement group.

- AWS Documentation: [Placement groups - Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/placement-groups.html#placement-groups-cluster)

*Source: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/sap-lens/best-practice-13-4.html*

---

## 14 – Select the optimal storage solution

# Best Practice 14.1 – Create mount points and volume associations to align with function

SAP filesystems have unique performance and sharing requirements. For example, the
performance profile of the database may require the data filesystem to support a high
number of read I/O operations, while the log filesystem is more likely to be constrained
by throughput. Filesystems such as `sapmnt` and `trans` need to be
shared so that all application servers can access logs and transport files. Recognizing
these differences, consider the mapping of filesystems to volumes to ensure there are no
performance bottlenecks and that access requirements are met.

**Suggestion 14.1.1 – Identify the SAP filesystems and directory
requirements for each System**

SAP filesystems include system directories (root, boot), executables, page or swap,
and application-specific requirements. Each of these should be analyzed to consider:

- The impact when a file system is at capacity (100% used), particularly for the
root directory
- Consistency of build, including whether it is included in an AMI, or deployment
patterns
- Resilience requirements
- Sharing requirements
- Performance profile

The core SAP filesystem requirements are listed in the SAP documentation. Use these as
a baseline and include other requirements specific to your organization.

- SAP Documentation: [SAP Required Filesystems and Directories](https://help.sap.com/docs/SLTOOLSET/910828cec5d14d6685da380aec1dc4ae/de6cad1446a743d3853dbcae48bddfba.html?version=CURRENT_VERSION)

**Suggestion 14.1.2 – Map the appropriate AWS storage service to
match with filesystem function**

A filesystem can either be local or shared (NFS / SMB). For shared filesystems
consider using AWS services, such as Amazon EFS and Amazon FSx, which provide
reliability and availability benefits when compared with a hosted NFS server.

Amazon EC2 instance store is another filesystem option which provides temporary
block-level storage for your instance. We do not recommend its use due to lack of
persistence, availability across instance types, and because it prevents the use of
instance recovery.

**Suggestion 14.1.3 – Use supported filesystem types**

The SAP-supported Linux distributions recommend a number of different file system
types. Later versions are standardizing on XFS, but support should be reviewed to ensure
there is no performance or functionality impact for your operating system and database
version.

- SAP Note: [405827 -
Linux: Recommended file systems](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/405827) [Requires SAP Portal Access]
- SAP Note: [2972496
- SAP HANA Filesystem Types](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/2972496) [Requires SAP Portal Access]

*Source: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/sap-lens/best-practice-14-1.html*

---

# Best Practice 14.2 – Select and configure EBS types aligned with performance requirements

For each filesystem function and storage service, evaluate storage layout guidelines
and tuning options to ensure that IOPS and throughput performance are optimized.

**Suggestion 14.2.1 – Evaluate storage characteristics and options for
EBS volume types**

AWS has a range of volume types with unique characteristics to suit different
performance requirements of SAP workloads. Use historical data, or sizing to evaluate the
IOPS and throughput requirements. Select your volume type by considering performance,
durability, flexibility, and cost.

IOPS and throughput of the `gp3` , `io1`, and `io2`
Block Express volume types are independent of the volume size.

IOPS and throughput of the `gp2` volume type is aligned to the volume
size. Oversizing the volume may be required to ensure the required IOPS and throughput is
available.

If choosing Amazon EBS io2 Block Express, ensure that it is available for the selected
instance types.

- AWS documentation: [Amazon EBS volume types](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/ebs-volume-types.html)

**Suggestion 14.2.2 – Scale linearly using LVM striping
mechanisms**

When the performance requirement cannot be met by a single EBS volume, consider
striping using Logical Volume Management (LVM). For example, if a single volume has 250
MiB/s throughput capacity, having a stripe set across four volumes can deliver 1000 MiB/s
throughput.

Volumes should be of the same size and performance characteristics.

In SAP HANA benchmark testing, the best performance has been achieved using a 256 KB
stripe size for data volumes and a 64 KB stripe size for log volumes.

Be aware of instance limits for throughput, I/O, and number of attached volumes.

- AWS Documentation: [Create an LVM Logical Volume on an EBS Volume](https://aws.amazon.com/premiumsupport/knowledge-center/create-lv-on-ebs-volume/)
- SAP Note: [2931808
- Usage of Logical Volume Manager (LVM) with SAP HANA](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/2931808) [Requires SAP Portal
Access]
- AWS Documentation: [Operating System and Storage Configuration - SAP HANA on AWS](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sap/latest/sap-hana/operating-system-and-storage-configuration.html#:~:text=Configure%20Storage%20for%20SAP%20HANA)

**Suggestion 14.2.3 – To ensure SAP HANA performance, follow AWS
provided storage guidelines**

AWS works with SAP to certify storage for SAP HANA workloads according to defined
performance benchmarks. The configuration provided by AWS balances performance, cost,
and durability within the framework of the SAP TDI 5 Storage KPIs. A compliant storage
layout is detailed in the documentation and used in Launch Wizard and quick start
deployments.

- AWS Documentation: [Storage Configuration for SAP HANA - SAP HANA on AWS](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sap/latest/sap-hana/hana-ops-storage-config.html)

If you deviate from the AWS configuration, it is recommended that you run the SAP
HANA Hardware and Cloud Measurement Tools.

- SAP Note: [2493172 -
SAP HANA Hardware and Cloud Measurement Tools](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/2493172) [Requires SAP Portal
Access]

When deciding between general purpose and Provisioned IOPS EBS types, it should be
noted that general purpose types meet the SAP HANA Storage KPIs. An in-memory database, such
as SAP HANA, has to load data from disk to memory upon database startup. Using Provisioned
IOPS EBS types can significantly improve startup times and also speed up tasks such as
backups and restores, which are dependent on storage performance.

**Suggestion 14.2.4 – For performant local backups at a low cost, use
st1 storage**

When SAP solutions need local storage for storing backups, consider using a
`st1` volume type for its low cost and high throughput. `st1` is
a low-cost block storage type designed for frequently accessed, throughput-intensive
workloads.

For SAP HANA, consider using AWS Backint Agent for SAP HANA to avoid the performance
and cost impact of a two-stage backup.

*Source: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/sap-lens/best-practice-14-2.html*

---

# Best Practice 14.3 - Evaluate Amazon EFS and Amazon FSx performance suitability for your SAP use case

Amazon EFS (Linux) and Amazon FSx (Windows) provide highly durable and available file
systems that can span multiple Availability Zones. Both solutions are designed to deliver
high performance, however, when choosing to use network file systems consider the access
patterns. For example, many small files, highly parallel writes or high write/read ratios
might not be suitable. For SAP workloads, this might apply to SAP HANA XSA, Java
executables, or large numbers of job and spool logs.

Amazon FSx for NetApp ONTAP is also a SAP-certified storage type for workloads including S/4HANA,
Business Suite on HANA, BW/4HANA, Business Warehouse on HANA, and Data Mart Solutions on
HANA. FSx for ONTAP allows you to easily create application-consistent snapshots,
space-efficient database clones in seconds and automatic replication of your database across
AWS Regions.

**Suggestion 14.3.1 – Evaluate scale and performance
options**

Amazon EFS has two modes for performance (general purpose and max I/O) and two
different performance modes (bursting mode and provisioned). For SAP applications, general
purpose performance mode usually provides sufficient I/O. There may be scenarios in which
provisioned throughput should be considered, such as when the amount of data in your file
system is low relative to throughput demands.

- AWS Documentation: [Amazon Elastic File
System (EFS) | FAQs - Scale and Performance](https://aws.amazon.com/efs/faq/#Scale_and_performance)
- AWS Documentation: [Amazon FSx
for Windows File Server Features | Scale and Performance](https://aws.amazon.com/fsx/windows/features/#Performance_and_scale)
- AWS Documentation: [SAP HANA on AWS with Amazon FSx for NetApp ONTAP](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sap/latest/sap-hana/sap-hana-amazon-fsx.html)

**Suggestion 14.3.2 - Consider temporary provisioning for short-term
requirements**

Use cases related to migrations or one-off activities might benefit from a temporary
file system where performance characteristics can be adjusted for the duration of the
event.

*Source: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/sap-lens/best-practice-14-3.html*

---

# Best Practice 14.4 – Consider memory as an alternative to storage

Consider the performance advantages of using memory for supported scenarios in the
database or application layer. SAP HANA uses memory by default, but might benefit from
options to optimize load or offload static data. Relational databases should take
advantage of caching, and application servers should consider if swap is a
requirement.

**Suggestion 14.4.1 – Optimize memory usage for SAP HANA**

Seek to understand the correlation between SAP HANA memory requirements and operating
system memory indicators to help ensure that memory bottlenecks do not impact performance.

- SAP Documentation: [SAP HANA Memory Usage and the Operating System](https://help.sap.com/viewer/6b94445c94ae495c83a19646e7c3fd56/2.0.05/en-US/ca10596b37f04909a96614553cb8ab1d.html#:~:text=Virtual%2C%20Physical%2C%20and%20Resident%20Memory&text=On%20most%20SAP%20HANA%20hosts,operational%20use%20by%20a%20process.)
- SAP Note: [1999997
- FAQ: SAP HANA Memory](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/1999997) [Requires SAP Portal Access]

To improve database startup performance in scenarios that do not involve a host
restart, consider the use of the SAP HANA Fast Restart option. The SAP HANA Fast Restart
option dedicates a portion of RAM as a temporary file system (`tempfs`), which is
treated by the operating system as persistent memory (until operating system restart) and
allows placement of column store main portion in that `tempfs`, which remains
there through an index server restart or crash. Thus, no reloading from storage (using I/O)
is necessary.

- SAP Documentation: [HANA fast restart documentation](https://help.sap.com/viewer/6b94445c94ae495c83a19646e7c3fd56/2.0.05/en-US/ce158d28135147f099b761f8b1ee43fc.html)

**Suggestion 14.4.2 – Use database caching for relational
databases**

For a relational database with high read IOPS requirements, database caching allows
you to significantly increase throughput and lower the data retrieval latency. The cache
acts as an adjacent data access layer to your database, to improve read performance.

The following documentation provides information about caching use-cases, but as most
of this detail is relevant to AWS databases, consult SAP Notes for information specific
to your relational database configuration.

- AWS Documentation: [Caching](https://aws.amazon.com/caching/)
(including [database
caching](https://aws.amazon.com/caching/database-caching/) )

**Suggestion 14.4.3 – Evaluate swap space requirements for SAP
applications**

When physical memory resources are exhausted, SAP uses swap to move inactive pages to
a dedicated disk-based storage area. Although having swap can prevent the application from
crashing due to memory insufficient memory, we recommend applying configuration parameters
and memory sizing so that swap is used infrequently.

If swap usage is expected, evaluate the characteristics of the allocated volume to
avoid further performance issues. Swap can prevent out of memory situations for SAP
applications, when the host runs out of physical memory.

- SAP Note: [153641 -
Swap space requirement for R/3 64-bit kernel](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/153641) [Requires SAP Portal Access]
- SAP Note: [2999334
- SWAP Utilization](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/2999334) (HANA related) [Requires SAP Portal Access]
- SAP Note: [2488097
- FAQ: Memory usage for the ABAP Server on Windows](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/2488097) [Requires SAP Portal
Access]

*Source: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/sap-lens/best-practice-14-4.html*

---

# Best Practice 14.5 – Choose appropriate backup solutions and schedule

Depending on the backup method, there is the potential to dramatically increase both
read and write operations on your storage, which can negatively impact the performance of
your application. This is particularly true for database level backups which might be
large in volume and lengthy in duration.

**Suggestion 14.5.1 – Determine a suitable backup window**

Define what is the most appropriate window for the running of backup operations
aligned to your business requirements. Consider key dependencies such as the overnight
batch schedule and the acceptable runtime.

**Suggestion 14.5.2 – Consider options to minimize the performance
impact of backups**

Analyze any storage or network constraints and evaluate options to minimize the
impact of the backup. This may include reducing the duration by using delta change backups
either at a database or storage level. Refer to the Reliability Pillar to ensure this does
not negatively impact the consistency of backups or the overall restoration time.

- SAP Lens [Reliability]: [Best Practice 12.1 -
Establish a method for consistent recovery of business data](./best-practice-12-1.html)

*Source: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/sap-lens/best-practice-14-5.html*

---

## 15 – Evaluate tuning options for the operating system, database, and SAP application

# Best Practice 15.1 – Follow operating system guidelines for SAP performance

SAP provides specific guidance on how best to tune for optimal performance for each of
the operating systems that are supported for the SAP software you are deploying. Be sure
to read all of the relevant SAP documentation on the operating system on which you are
deploying both to understand the relevant tuning parameters and to take advantage of any
operating system-specific options to make performance tuning easier and more
dynamic.

**Suggestion 15.1.1 – Review operating system-related SAP notes prior
to installation, version update, or infrastructure change**

When building or updating your operating system (through automation or manually)
confirm that the appropriate performance settings specific to your combination of SAP
software and operating system version are applied.

**Suggestion 15.1.2 – Evaluate operating system vendor-supplied SAP
tuning**

Red Hat and SUSE provide images and repositories which contain tools and configuration
optimized for running SAP. These are available in the AWS Marketplace or in a
bring-your-own-subscription (BYOS) model.

Vendors are invested in ensuring that their operating systems are optimised for the
SAP application. Using vendor-supplied tuning tools such as `saptune` or the
(Ansible) system roles for Red Hat Enterprise Linux can assist in defining a known
baseline for performance tuning. While this does not preclude tuning the operating system
to best accommodate your specific SAP workload, these tools can reduce the effort
associated with researching, calculating and applying the most common requirements.
Configuration associated with the `tuned` daemon can also adjust dynamically
using information it gathers from the system, including CPU count and available memory.

Operating System
Guidance

SUSE Linux Enterprise Server

SAP Note: [1275776 - Linux: Preparing SLES for SAP environments](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/1275776) [Requires SAP
Portal Access]

Red Hat Enterprise Linux

SAP Note: [2777782 - SAP HANA DB: Recommended OS Settings for RHEL 8](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/2777782) [Requires
SAP Portal Access]

Microsoft Windows

(Consult SAP or Vendor documentation for guidance)

Oracle Enterprise Linux

SAP Note: [2478541 - Operating System Requirements for Oracle Database](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/2478541) [Requires
SAP Portal Access]

**Suggestion 15.1.3 – Apply relevant network parameters to the
operating system**

SAP system performance can be seriously impacted by network misconfiguration,
particularly in SAP HANA scale-out database designs as well as in communication between
different application server instances and the database instance in a system environment.
While in many cases in AWS, the maximum network throughput of an instance is dictated by
the instance family and size, tuning of the network settings at the operating system level
and in the SAP software itself can have an impact.

Refer to the following AWS and SAP recommendations:

- AWS Documentation: [Benchmarking Network Throughput between Amazon EC2 Linux instances in the same
Amazon VPC](https://aws.amazon.com/premiumsupport/knowledge-center/network-throughput-benchmark-linux-ec2/)
- AWS Documentation: [Elastic Network Adapter – High Performance Network Interface for Amazon EC2](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/aws/elastic-network-adapter-high-performance-network-interface-for-amazon-ec2/)
- AWS Documentation: [Cluster Placement Groups](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/placement-groups.html#placement-groups-cluster)
- SAP Note: [2198693
- Key Monitoring Metrics for SAP on Amazon Web Services (AWS)](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/2198693) [Requires
SAP Portal Access]
- SAP Note: [1612283
- Hardware Configuration Standards and Guidance](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/1612283) [Requires SAP Portal Access]
- SAP Note: [2081065
- Troubleshooting SAP HANA Network](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/2081065) [Requires SAP Portal Access]
- SAP Note: [1100926
- FAQ: Network performance](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/1100926) [Requires SAP Portal Access]

*Source: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/sap-lens/best-practice-15-1.html*

---

# Best Practice 15.2 – Modify database parameters to align with hardware selection

SAP provides specific guidance to optimize performance of an SAP system by modifying
certain parameters of the underlying database. These parameters are specific to database
type and can vary based on whether it’s supporting an analytical or a transactional type
application.

**Suggestion 15.2.1 – Review SAP HANA-specific tuning parameters, if
applicable**

Operating System and SAP HANA Database parameters can significantly impact
performance. Follow SAP on AWS recommendations for Operating system and storage
configuration.

- AWS Documentation: [SAP HANA on AWS – Operating System and Storage Configuration](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sap/latest/sap-hana/operating-system-and-storage-configuration.html)

Refer to SAP notes and documentation for guidance on SAP HANA parameters including
memory allocation.

- SAP Note: [2000000
- FAQ: SAP HANA Performance Optimization](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/2000000) [Requires SAP Portal Access]
- SAP Documentation: [HANA Parameter: global_allocation_limit](https://help.sap.com/viewer/009e68bc5f3c440cb31823a3ec4bb95b/2.0.05/en-US/514ab38a2e574c85a70ebba80ff16d99.html#loio514ab38a2e574c85a70ebba80ff16d99__configSPS05_id_805)
- SAP Note: [1999997
- FAQ: SAP HANA Memory](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/1999997) [Requires SAP Portal Access]
- SAP Note: [2926166
- How to limit the overall SAP HANA memory allocation](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/2926166) [Requires SAP Portal
Access]

**Suggestion 15.2.2 – Review database tuning guidance for non-SAP HANA
databases**

Regardless of the underlying database for your SAP system, performance of the system
is in part dependent on how the database is tuned. Each database has specific
recommendations for tuning based on available compute, memory, and disk storage. Certain
database parameters are dependent on your choice of underlying EC2 instance size; for
example, the physical memory available will limit the `db_cache_size` for an
Oracle database.

For information relevant to your database, refer to the following:

Database
Guidance

SAP ASE
SAP Note: [2473646 - Performance
and Tuning information for ASE -SAP ASE](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/2473646) [Requires SAP Portal Access]

IBM Db2
SAP Note: [2751102 – DB6: DB2 11.5
Standard Parameter Settings](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/2751102) [Requires SAP Portal Access]

Oracle
SAP Note: [2470718 – Oracle
Database Parameter 12.2 / 18c / 19c](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/2470718) [Requires SAP Portal Access]

Microsoft SQL Server
SAP Note: [2779607 – Configuration
Parameters for SQL Server 2019](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/2779607) [Requires SAP Portal Access] , SAP Note:
[2729848 – SAP
Installation Media and SQL4SAP for SQL Server 2019](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/2729848) [Requires SAP Portal
Access]

SAP MaxDB
SAP Note: [819641 – FAQ: SAP MaxDB
performance](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/819641) [Requires SAP Portal Access]

*Source: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/sap-lens/best-practice-15-2.html*

---

# Best Practice 15.3 – Modify SAP parameters to align with hardware selection

Tuning SAP application parameters can help improve the performance of the application.
These parameters are often dependent on the underlying hardware configuration and
operating system type.

**Suggestion 15.3.1 – Allow SAP to self-tune according to
PHYS_MEMSIZE**

For recent versions of SAP software, using kernel release 7.40 or higher, self-tuning
of certain parameters is possible and recommended. For instance, many parameters are
derived via formulas related to the main memory available on an instance (PHYS_MEMSIZE).
This allows for automatic tuning of memory parameters when resizing an EC2 instance
underlying the SAP software to meet changing performance requirements.

- SAP Documentation: [SAP Memory Management: Parameter Reference](https://help.sap.com/viewer/f146e75588924fa4987b6c8f1a7a8c7e/LATEST/en-US/493431b15cce5717e10000000a42189b.html)
- SAP Note: [2085980
– New features in memory management as of Kernel Release 7.40](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/2085980) [Requires SAP
Portal Access]

**Suggestion 15.3.2 – Review SAP swap space and maximum memory
use**

When running SAP on AWS, overutilized swap space on disk can cause I/O credit
exhaustion on Amazon EBS and lead to performance degradation. Evaluate the different
[EBS storage options](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/ebs-volume-types.html) available on AWS and configure swap space to meet your
performance needs.

- SAP Note: [1597355
- Swap-space recommendation for Linux](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/1597355) [Requires SAP Portal Access]
- SAP Documentation: [Swap Space Requirements](https://help.sap.com/saphelp_nw73/helpdata/en/49/325e42e93934ffe10000000a421937/frameset.htm)

*Source: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/sap-lens/best-practice-15-3.html*

---

# Best Practice 15.4 – Consider performance tuning for recovery and availability options

In alignment with both the Well-Architected Reliability and Operational Excellence
pillars, tuning of the SAP system given your chosen recovery and resiliency requirements
should be evaluated to minimize any performance impact. Take into consideration items such
as system performance during a backup, clustering options for the chosen database (for
example, synchronous vs. asynchronous SAP HANA System Replication), and the distribution
of load across multiple SAP application server instances.

**Suggestion 15.4.1 – Review performance recommendations for backup
and recovery solutions**

Each supported database has different recommendations to optimize the performance of
backups and recovery operations, and these often work in conjunction with your chosen
software solution for managing backups and restores, including third-party offerings.

In general, following the guidelines for improving throughput between an EC2 instance
and the storage target of your backup (such as, EBS volumes, S3 buckets, and EFS file
systems) can improve the performance of your backup and recovery.

For example, when using Amazon S3 as a repository for backups and AWS Backint Agent for SAP
HANA, you can enable performance improvements via changing configuration parameters, such as
the maximum concurrency settings. Another common way to improve backup performance is to
increase EBS volume performance characteristics, such as maximizing GP3 throughput
configuration to 1,000 MB/s.

For more information, refer to the following:

- AWS Documentation: [AWS Backint Agent for SAP HANA](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sap/latest/sap-hana/aws-backint-agent-installing-configuring.html#aws-backint-agent-performance-tuning)
- AWS Documentation: [SAP NetWeaver on AWS – Backup and Recovery](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sap/latest/sap-netweaver/backup-and-recovery.html)
- AWS Documentation: [S3
Configuration Parameters](https://awscli.amazonaws.com/v2/documentation/api/latest/topic/s3-config.html)
- SAP on AWS Blog: [Build for availability and reliability](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/awsforsap/sap-on-aws-build-for-availability-and-reliability/)

Database
Guidance

SAP HANA

- AWS Documentation: [SAP HANA on AWS – Storage Configuration for SAP HANA](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sap/latest/sap-hana/hana-ops-storage-config.html)
- SAP Note: [1842096 - HANA
Backup & Restore Performance](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/1842096) [Requires SAP Portal Access]
- SAP Note: [2945518 -
Performance issues encountered on HANA when a data backup is
running](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/2945518) [Requires SAP Portal Access]

SAP ASE
(Consult SAP or Vendor documentation for guidance)

IBM Db2
(Consult SAP or Vendor documentation for guidance)

Oracle
SAP Note: [2084077 - How to plan
backup cycle for Oracle database](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/2084077) [Requires SAP Portal Access]

Microsoft SQL Server
SAP Note: [1420452 - FAQ: Restore
and recovery with MS SQL Server](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/1420452) [Requires SAP Portal Access]

SAP MaxDB
SAP Note: [1377148 - FAQ: SAP MaxDB
backup / recovery](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/1377148) [Requires SAP Portal Access]

**Suggestion 15.4.2 – Review configuration of clustering
parameters**

Clustering options for SAP HANA and other databases often rely on a confirmed
connection in a cluster (that is, a heartbeat) between the primary instance and the
failover instance. SAP administrators must balance the speed with which an action can
occur in the system with the potential for any failover side effects that may occur if
there is a false negative interruption in communication. Follow recommendations for
timeout parameters and related settings.

- AWS Documentation: [SAP HANA on AWS: High Availability Configuration Guide for SLES and RHEL](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sap/latest/sap-hana/sap-hana-on-aws-ha-configuration.html)
- AWS Documentation: [SAP
HANA on AWS Operations Guide: Networking](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sap/latest/sap-hana/hana-ops-networking.html)
- AWS Documentation: [SAP
on AWS – IBM Db2 HADR with Pacemaker](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sap/latest/sap-AnyDB/sap-ibm-pacemaker.html)
- SAP Note: 1612105 - [DB6: FAQ on Db2 High
Availability Disaster Recovery (HADR)](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/1612105) [Requires SAP Portal Access]
- Operating System-specific Documentation: [SUSE Linux SAP HSR Scale-up Performance Optimized Scenario](https://documentation.suse.com/sbp/all/html/SLES4SAP-hana-sr-guide-PerfOpt-12/index.html)
- Operating System-specific Documentation: [Automated SAP HANA System
Replication in Scale-Up in pacemaker cluster](https://access.redhat.com/articles/3004101)

*Source: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/sap-lens/best-practice-15-4.html*

---

## 16 – Understand ongoing performance and optimization options

# Best Practice 16.1 – Have data to evaluate performance

To evaluate the performance of an SAP system and take action in the event performance
is suboptimal, monitoring data must be collected for compute, memory, storage, and
networking as described in the Well-Architected Framework Performance Excellence
guidelines concerning monitoring your resources. As stated in the Well-Architected
Framework Operational Excellence pillar, understanding the current state of the system,
putting in place key performance indicators, and collecting metrics in a timely manner for
diagnosis are crucial for investigating performance issues.

- Well-Architected Framework [Performance Efficiency]: [Monitor Your Resources to Ensure That They Are Performing as Expected](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/performance-efficiency-pillar/monitor-your-resources-to-ensure-that-they-are-performing-as-expected.html)
- Well-Architected Framework [Operational Excellence]: [Understanding Workload Health](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/operational-excellence-pillar/understanding-workload-health.html)

**Suggestion 16.1.1 – Gather and store data relevant to performance
metrics**

To collect and view relevant SAP monitoring data, you should install and configure
the AWS Data Provider for SAP and set up metrics in your chosen monitoring tools that
support your SAP workload. Further details on monitoring and additional recommendations
are available in the Operational Excellence pillar.

- AWS Documentation: [AWS
Data Provider for SAP](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sap/latest/general/aws-data-provider.html)
- SAP Lens [Operational Excellence]: [Best
Practice 1.1 - Implement prerequisites for monitoring SAP on AWS](./best-practice-1-1.html)
- SAP Lens [Operational Excellence]: [Best
Practice 1.2 - Implement infrastructure monitoring for SAP](./best-practice-1-2.html)
- SAP Lens [Operational Excellence]: [Best
Practice 1.3 - Implement application and database monitoring for SAP](./best-practice-1-3.html)

*Source: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/sap-lens/best-practice-16-1.html*

---

# Best Practice 16.2 – Establish baseline performance requirements

Every SAP application has unique performance requirements. Using historical monitoring
data helps SAP administration teams understand the baseline performance of these
applications, enabling them to identify and understand the extent of any performance
changes. Relevant alerts can be put in place to detect anomalies, such as unintended CPU
spikes, storage throughput deltas, memory consumption increases, and more complex
performance decrements. This monitoring data can be used to further fine-tune
performance.

**Suggestion 16.2.1 – Collect and evaluate data that reflects
SAP-specific KPIs**

This suggestion aligns closely with additional suggestions in the Well-Architected
Framework Performance Efficiency Pillar discussion regarding [resource monitoring](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/performance-efficiency-pillar/monitor-your-resources-to-ensure-that-they-are-performing-as-expected.html).

In addition to this general guidance, SAP-specific KPIs include dialog response time,
buffer swaps, used memory. These KPIs might differ based on the type of SAP software and
version you are running on. Further detail on KPI and monitoring recommendations is
available in this document in the Operational Excellence pillar:

- SAP Lens [Operational Excellence]: [Best
Practice 1.2 - Implement infrastructure monitoring for SAP](./best-practice-1-2.html)
- SAP Lens [Operational Excellence]: [Best
Practice 1.3 - Implement application and database monitoring for SAP](./best-practice-1-3.html)

*Source: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/sap-lens/best-practice-16-2.html*

---

# Best practice 16.3 – Identify performance trends using data

After baselines for performance are established, system administrators must monitor
trends over time to see if KPIs remain stable within preferred norms. If the performance
data indicates a trend toward unacceptable values of the KPI, system administrators can
then take steps to avoid or mitigate performance impacts.

**Suggestion 16.3.1 – Conduct regular reviews of SAP system
performance**

Periodic reviews of KPIs by system administrators can help identify trends in
performance-related data as well as determine which alerts might be most beneficial. These
alerts can then be used to automate notifications should the trend continue as well as put
in place auto-remediation measures to address the potential performance issue (for
example, dynamically changing SAP parameters in response to performance indicators).
Examples of KPIs and related trends can be found in SAP EarlyWatch Alert reports, which in
some cases can be customized with additional useful metrics. SAP service level reporting
can also be useful if you have Service Level Agreements (SLAs) in place for your SAP
workloads.

- SAP Documentation: [Service Level
Reporting](http://support.sap.com/slr)
- SAP Note: [1040343
- SAP EarlyWatch Alert](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/1040343) [Requires SAP Portal Access]
- SAP Note: [1829914
- Customize EWA Reports](https://launchpad.support.sap.com/#/notes/1829914) [Requires SAP Portal Access]

**Suggestion 16.3.2 – Retain historical data to identify
trends**

You should retain performance data and associated logs for a predetermined period of
time to understand trends in system behavior. Performance tuning of any SAP system will
depend on the ability to look back over historical periods of days, weeks, and months to
understand what constitutes a performance trend or cyclical performance event. Common
events that require retention of data to observe performance impacts include:

- Month-end and year-end financial processing
- Increased reporting requirements around business milestones (for example, after a
large semi-annual sales kick-off)
- On-boarding of a large new SAP user population within the business
- Technology changes, such as infrastructure sizing, database patches, operating
system version updates, or SAP software upgrades

*Source: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/sap-lens/best-practice-16-3.html*

---

# Best Practice 16.4 – Identify and triage performance issues

When key metrics indicate performance is degrading, have a process in place to
remediate the underlying cause. Using automation (see the following best practice on
dynamic scaling) can reduce the need for manual intervention, but when that is not
possible, having an automated alerting process for administrators is vital.

**Suggestion 16.4.1 – Configure performance alerts
appropriately**

Follow the guidelines as mentioned in the Well-Architected Framework Performance
Efficiency pillar regarding monitoring and alerts, and make use of SAP alerting
capabilities where they provide additional capabilities. Additional details are also
available in [Operational Excellence] [1 - Design SAP
workload to allow understanding and reaction to its state](./design-principle-1.html).

- Well-Architected Framework [Performance Efficiency]: [Monitoring](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/performance-efficiency-pillar/monitoring.html)
- SAP Documentation: [SAP NetWeaver Alert Monitor](https://help.sap.com/doc/7a827019728810148a4b1a83b0e91070/1610 001/en-US/frameset.htm?frameset.htm)

**Suggestion 16.4.2 – Automatic remediation of performance
incidents**

While the management of performance incidents involves the best practices on
operations detailed in the Well-Architected Framework Operational Excellence pillar, the
proactive detection and automated remediation of potential performance impairment can
prevent deepening a performance problem and can improve the end-user experience. When
automated processes for mitigating a performance issue are not possible, having a detailed
runbook in place on how the operational team should respond to a performance issue can
accelerate the response to a performance incident.

- SAP Lens [Operational Excellence]: [Best
Practice 1.8 Use automated response and recovery techniques to react to monitoring
alerts](./best-practice-1-8.html)
- Well-Architected Framework [Operational Excellence]: [Best Practices: Operate](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/framework/oe-operate.html)

*Source: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/sap-lens/best-practice-16-4.html*

---

# Best Practice 16.5 – Scale to meet performance demands

One of the primary benefits of operating workloads in AWS is the ability to increase
or decrease the compute capacity and change the storage performance characteristics to
match the performance required for the use case. For SAP workloads, use dynamic scaling
where applicable to avoid performance bottlenecks. Scenarios where dynamic scaling is not
possible, such as scaling out an SAP HANA database cluster, use a manual deployment
process.

**Suggestion 16.5.1 – Reactively scale SAP workloads**

In response to dynamic changes in workload performance requirements, scale your SAP
resources accordingly. Where possible, use automation to scale in or out, but when that is
not an option (such as scaling up a database instance), have a process in place to do so
manually. Consider:

- Adding or removing application server capacity or changing instance sizes as
required to meet demand
- Changing SAP parameters to redistribute virtual resources programmatically
- [Modifying storage type](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/ebs-modify-volume.html) (for example, Amazon EBS `gp3` to
`io2` or vice versa in AWS), where applicable, to optimize storage
performance

- AWS Documentation: [Request modifications to your EBS volumes](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/requesting-ebs-volume-modifications.html)

**Suggestion 16.5.2 – Schedule scaling for predictable SAP
workloads**

Whether in an automated or manual fashion, scaling an SAP workload up or down based on
predictable performance patterns is advisable. For instance, when month-end financial
processing on an SAP ECC system leads to a predictable 20% increase in processing
requirements on application server instances, system administrators can proactively
increase the number or size of application servers, then scale-in the number of instances
when the usage predictably decreases.

*Source: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/sap-lens/best-practice-16-5.html*

---

# Best Practice 16.6 – Develop mechanisms for simulating production load for analysis purposes

Having a clone of production data in a test system allows system administrators to
simulate production SAP workloads and conduct vital performance tests, such as stress and
volume testing. This type of testing can help identify potential performance bottlenecks
and prevent performance issues from occurring in a live production environment.

**Suggestion 16.6.1 – Define performance sensitive activities**

Evaluate which transactions, reports, and operational activities could have an impact on
your business if they do not meet peak load requirements or time-critical thresholds. For
example, an overnight batch job which must complete in five hours, or a customer-facing
transaction accessed concurrently by thousands of users during a quarterly business peak.
Document and agree on the measurement approach, KPIs, and success criteria for these
workload activities.

**Suggestion 16.6.2 – Create an automated test approach for key
activities**

If required, develop a test strategy to confirm that your SAP workload performance
benchmarks are met. Evaluate how test landscapes and tools can enable a repeatable suite of
tests to measure the impact of operational activities, change releases and major patching on
the performance of your workload.

*Source: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/sap-lens/best-practice-16-6.html*

---

# Best Practice 16.7 – Continually optimize sizing and configuration based on performance data

Review performance metrics on a regular basis outside of your incident response
process. By doing so, you can discover system components that are undersized, oversized,
or no longer used at all. A regular performance optimization cadence should be established
for your SAP workloads, focusing on right sizing your system components for real user
load. This activity will improve user experience, eliminate unneeded aspects of your
architecture, and help improve both the cost effectiveness and resilience of your
workload.

**Suggestion 16.7.1 – Perform regular architecture right sizing with
historical performance metrics as a guide**

Regularly review your SAP workload for opportunities to right-size its components.
Consider whether storage, compute, network, and supporting services need to be increased
or decreased to better fit your business performance requirements.

For further information, refer to the following resources:

- SAP Lens [Cost Optimization]: [Best Practice
20.5 - Review usage for opportunities to optimize](./best-practice-20-5.html)
- SAP Lens [Operational Excellence]: [Best
Practice 4.4 - Perform regular workload reviews to optimize for resiliency,
performance, agility, and cost](./best-practice-4-4.html)
- AWS Documentation: [Right-Sizing](https://aws.amazon.com/aws-cost-management/aws-cost-optimization/right-sizing/)

*Source: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/sap-lens/best-practice-16-7.html*

---
